We are becoming cyborgs.
Like our brains are fundamentally changed.
Everyone who grew up with electronics,
we are fundamentally different from previous,
from Homo sapiens.
I call us Homo Techno.
I think we have evolved into Homo Techno,
which is like essentially a new species.
Previous technologies, I mean,
may have even been more profound
and moved us to a certain degree,
but I think the computers are what make us Homo Techno.
I think this is what, it's a brain augmentation.
So it like allows for actual evolution.
Like the computers accelerate the degree
to which all the other technologies
can also be accelerated.
Would you classify yourself as a Homo sapien
or a Homo Techno?
Definitely Homo Techno.
So you're one of the earliest of the species.
I think most of us are.
The following is a conversation with Grimes,
an artist, musician, songwriter, producer, director,
and a fascinating human being
who thinks a lot about both the history
and the future of human civilization.
Studying the dark periods of our past
to help form an optimistic vision of our future.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors
in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's Grimes.
Oh yeah, the Cloudlifter, there you go.
There you go.
You know your stuff.
Have you ever used the Cloudlifter?
Yeah, I actually, this microphone in Cloudlifter
is what Michael Jackson used, so.
No, really?
Yeah, this is like thriller and stuff.
This mic and the Cloudlifter.
And that, yeah, it's an incredible microphone.
It's very flattering on vocals.
I've used this a lot.
It's great for demo vocals.
It's great in a room.
Sometimes it's easier to record vocals
if you're just in a room and the music's playing
and you just want to feel it
so it's not in the headphones.
And this mic is pretty directional,
so I think it's a good mic for just vibing out
and just getting a real good vocal take.
Just vibing, just in a room.
Anyway, this is the Michael Jackson, Quincy Jones.
Microphone.
I feel way more badass now.
All right, you want to just get into it?
I guess so.
All right, one of your names,
at least in this space and time, is C, like the letter C.
And you told me that C means a lot of things.
It's the speed of light.
It's the render rate of the universe.
It's yes in Spanish.
It's the crescent moon.
And it happens to be my favorite programming language
because it basically runs the world,
but it's also powerful, fast, and it's dangerous
because you can mess things up really bad with it
because of all the pointers.
But anyway, which of these associations
with the name C is the coolest to you?
I mean, to me, the coolest is the speed of light, obviously,
or the speed of light.
When I say render rate of the universe,
I think I mean the speed of light
because essentially that's what we're rendering at.
See, I think we'll know if we're in a simulation,
if the speed of light changes
because if they can improve their render speed, then...
Well, it's already pretty good.
It's already pretty good, but if it improves,
then we'll know, we can probably be like,
okay, they've updated or upgraded.
Well, it's fast enough for us humans
because it seems immediate.
There's no delay, there's no latency
in terms of us humans on Earth interacting with things.
But if you're like intergalactic species
operating on a much larger scale,
then you're gonna start noticing some weird stuff.
Or if you can operate in like around a black hole,
then you're gonna start to see some render issues.
You can't go faster than the speed of light, correct?
So it really limits our ability
or one's ability to travel space.
Theoretically, you can, you have wormholes.
So there's nothing in general relativity
that precludes faster than speed of light travel,
but it just seems you're gonna have to do
some really funky stuff with very heavy things
that have like weirdnesses,
that have basically tears in space time.
We don't know how to do that.
Do navigators know how to do it?
Do navigators?
Yeah, folding space, basically making wormholes.
So the name C.
Yes.
Who are you?
Do you think of yourself as multiple people?
Are you one person?
Do you know like in this morning
where you're a different person than you are tonight?
We are, I should say, recording this
basically at midnight, which is awesome.
Yes, thank you so much.
I think I'm about eight hours late.
No, you're right on time.
Good morning.
This is the beginning of a new day soon.
Anyway, are you the same person
you were in the morning in the evening?
Do you, as there are multiple people in there,
do you think of yourself as one person?
Or maybe you have no clue?
Or are you just a giant mystery to yourself?
Okay, these are really intense questions, but...
Let's go, let's go.
Because I asked this myself,
like look in the mirror, who are you?
People tell you to just be yourself,
but what does that even mean?
I mean, I think my personality changes
with everyone I talk to.
So I have a very inconsistent personality, yeah.
Person to person, so the interaction,
your personality materializes.
Or my mood, like I'll go from being like a megalomaniac
to being like, you know, just like a total hermit
who is very shy.
So some combinatorial combination of your mood
and the person you're interacting with.
Yeah, mood and people I'm interacting with.
But I think everyone's like that, maybe not.
Well, not everybody acknowledges it
and able to introspect it.
Who brings up, what kind of person,
what kind of mood brings out the best in you?
As an artist and as a human, can you introspect this?
Like my best friends, like people I can,
when I'm like super confident
and I know that they're gonna understand
everything I'm saying, so like my best friends,
then when I can start being really funny,
that's always my like peak mode.
But it's like, yeah, takes a lot to get there.
Let's talk about constraints.
You've talked about constraints and limits.
Do those help you out as an artist or as a human being?
Or do they get in the way?
Do you like the constraints?
So in creating music and creating art and living life,
do you like the constraints that this world puts on you?
Or do you hate them?
If constraints are moving, then you're good, right?
Like it's like, as we are progressing with technology,
we're changing the constraints of like artistic creation,
you know, making video and music and stuff
is getting a lot cheaper.
There's constantly new technology and new software
that's making it faster and easier.
We have so much more freedom than we had in the 70s,
like when Michael Jackson, you know,
when they recorded Thriller with this microphone,
like they had to use a mixing desk and all this stuff.
And like probably even getting a studio
is probably really expensive
and you have to be a really good singer
and you have to know how to use like the mixing desk
and everything.
And now I can just, you know,
I've made a whole album on this computer.
I have a lot more freedom,
but then I'm also constrained in different ways
because there's like literally millions more artists.
It's like a much bigger playing field.
It's just like, I also, I didn't learn music.
I'm not a natural musician.
So I don't know anything about actual music.
I just know about like the computer.
So I'm really kind of just like messing around
and like trying things out.
Well, yeah, I mean, but the nature of music is changing.
So you're saying you don't know actual music,
but music is changing.
Music is becoming, you've talked about this,
it's becoming, it's like merging with technology.
Yes.
It's becoming something more than just like
the notes on a piano.
It's becoming some weird composition
that requires engineering skills, programming skills,
some kind of human robot interaction skills,
and still some of the same things that Michael Jackson had,
which is like a good year for a good sense of taste
of what's good and not the final thing
what is put together.
Like you're allowed, you're enabled, empowered
with a laptop to layer stuff,
to start like layering insane amounts of stuff.
And it's super easy to do that.
I do think music production is a really underrated art form.
I feel like people really don't appreciate it.
When I look at publishing splits,
the way that people like pay producers and stuff,
it's super, producers are just deeply underrated.
Like so many of the songs that are popular right now
or for the last 20 years,
like part of the reason they're popular
is because the production is really interesting
or really sick or really cool.
And it's like, I don't think listeners,
like people just don't really understand
what music production is.
It's not, it's sort of like this weird,
discombobulated art form.
It's not like a formal, because it's so new,
there isn't like a formal training
or a path for it.
It's mostly driven by like autodidacts.
Like it's like almost everyone I know
who's good at production,
like I didn't go to music school or anything.
They just taught themselves.
Are they mostly different?
Like the music producers, you know,
is there some commonalities that time together
or are they all just different kinds of weirdos?
Cause I just, I just saw that with Rick Rubin.
I don't know if you've.
Yeah, I mean, Rick Rubin is like literally
one of the gods of music production.
Like he's one of the people who first, you know,
who like made music production, you know,
made the production as important
as the actual lyrics or the notes.
But the thing he does, which is interesting,
I don't know if you can speak to that,
but just hanging out with him,
he seems to just sit there in silence,
close his eyes and listen.
It's like, he almost does nothing.
And that nothing somehow gives you freedom
to be the best version of yourself.
So that's music production somehow too,
which is like encouraging you to do less,
to simplify, to like push towards minimalism.
I mean, I guess, I mean,
I work differently from Rick Rubin
because Rick Rubin produces for other artists,
whereas like I mostly produce for myself.
So it's a very different situation.
I also think Rick Rubin, he's in that,
I would say advanced category of producer
where like you've like earned your,
you can have an engineer and stuff
and people like do the stuff for you.
But I usually just like do stuff myself.
So you're the engineer, the producer and the artist.
Yeah, I guess I would say I'm in the era,
like the post Rick Rubin era,
like I come from the kind of like
Skrillex school of thought,
which is like where you are.
Yeah, the engineer, producer, artist.
Like, I mean, lately,
sometimes I'll work with a producer now.
I'm gently sort of delicately starting to collaborate
a little bit more,
but like, I think I'm kind of from the,
like the whatever 2010s explosion of things
where everything became available on the computer
and you kind of got this like loan wizard energy thing going.
So you embraced being the loneliness.
Is the loneliness somehow an engine of creativity?
Like, so most of your stuff,
most of your creative quote unquote genius and quotes
is in the privacy of your mind.
Yes.
Well, it was, but here's the thing.
I was talking to Daniel Eck and he said,
he's like most artists, they have about 10 years,
like 10 good years.
And then they usually stop making their like vital shit.
And I feel like I'm sort of like nearing the end
of my 10 years on my own.
And so you have to become somebody else.
Now I'm like,
I'm in the process of becoming somebody else
and reinventing when I work with other people
because I've never worked with other people.
I find that I make like,
that I'm exceptionally rejuvenated
and making like some of the most vital work I've ever made.
So, because I think another human brain is like
one of the best tools you can possibly find.
Like, it's a funny way to put it, I love it.
It's like, if a tool is like, you know,
whatever HP plus one or like adds some like stats
to your character, like another human brain
will like square it instead of just like adding something.
Double up the experience points.
I love this.
We should also mention we're playing Tavern music
before this and which I love, which I first one,
I think I first.
You have to stop the Tavern music.
Yeah, because it doesn't, the audio.
Okay, okay.
But it makes.
Yeah, it'll make the podcast going.
Add it in post, add it in post.
No one will want to listen to the podcast.
It probably would, but it makes me,
it reminds me like a video game,
like a role playing video game
where you have experience points.
There's something really joyful about wandering places
like Elder Scrolls, like Skyrim,
just exploring these landscapes in another world.
And then you get experience points
and you can work on different skills
and somehow you progress in life.
And I don't know, it's simple.
It doesn't have some of the messy complexities of life.
And there's usually a bad guy.
You can fight in Skyrim, it's dragons and so on.
I'm sure in Elden Ring,
there's a bunch of monsters you can fight.
I love that.
I feel like Elden Ring,
I feel like this is a good analogy to music protection though
because it's like, I feel like the engineers
and the people creating these open worlds
are, it's sort of like similar to people,
to music producers,
whereas it's like this hidden archetype
that like no one really understands what they do
and no one really knows who they are,
but they're like, it's like the artist engineer
because it's like, it's both art
and fairly complex engineering.
Well, you're saying they don't get enough credit.
Aren't you kind of changing that
by becoming the person doing everything?
Aren't you, isn't the engineer?
Well, I mean, others have gone before me.
I'm not, you know, there's like Timbaland and Skrillex
and there's all these people that are like,
you know, very famous for this.
But I just think the general,
I think people get confused about what it is
and just don't really know what it is per se.
And it's just when I see a song,
like when there's like a hit song,
like I'm just trying to think of like,
just going for like even just a basic pop hit,
like was it like rules by Dua Lipa or something?
The production on that is actually like really crazy.
I mean, the song is also great,
but it's like the production is exceptionally memorable.
Like, you know, and it's just like no one,
I can't, I don't even know who produced that song.
It just like isn't part of like the rhetoric
of how we just discuss the creation of art.
We just sort of like don't consider the music producer
because I think the music producer used to be more,
just simply recording things.
Yeah, that's interesting.
Cause when you think about movies,
we talk about the actor and the actresses,
but we also talk about the director.
Directors, yeah.
We don't talk about like that with the music as often.
The Beatles music producer was one of the first kind of,
got one of the first people sort of introducing
crazy sound design into pop music.
I forget his name.
He has the same, I forget his name, but, you know,
like he was doing all the weird stuff,
like dropping pianos and like, yeah.
Oh, to get the, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
To get the sound, to get the authentic sound.
What about lyrics?
You think those, where did they fit into how important they are?
I was heartbroken to learn that Elvis didn't write his songs.
I was very mad.
A lot of people don't write their songs.
I understand this, but.
But here's the thing.
I feel like there's this desire for authenticity.
I used to be like really mad
when like people wouldn't write or produce their music.
And I'd be like, that's fake.
And then I realized there's all this like weird bitterness
and like agronious in art about authenticity.
But I had this kind of like weird realization recently
where I started thinking that like,
art is sort of a decentralized collective thing.
Like art is kind of a conversation with all the artists
that have ever lived before you, you know?
Like it's like, you're really just sort of,
it's not like anyone's reinventing the wheel here.
Like you're kind of just taking, you know,
thousands of years of art
and like running it through your own little algorithm
and then like making your like your interpretation of it.
You just joined the conversation
with all the other artists that came before.
It's such a beautiful way to look at it.
Like, and it's like, I feel like everyone's always like,
there's always copyright and IP and this and that
or authenticity.
And it's just like, I think we need to stop seeing this
as this like egotistical thing of like,
oh, the creative genius, the lone creative genius
or this or that.
It's like, I think art isn't, shouldn't be about that.
I think art is something
that sort of brings humanity together.
And it's also art is also kind of the collective memory
of humans.
It's like, we don't, like we don't give a fuck
about whatever ancient Egypt,
like how much grain got sent that day
and sending the records and like, you know, like
who went where and, you know,
how many shields needed to be produced for this.
Like we just remember their art.
And it's like, you know, it's like in our day to day life,
there's all this stuff that seems more important than art
because it helps us function and survive.
But when all this is gone, like the only thing
that's really going to be left is the art.
The technology will be obsolete.
That's so fascinating.
Like the humans will be dead.
That is true.
A good compression of human history is the art
we've generated across the different centuries
of different millennia.
So when the aliens come.
When the aliens come,
they're going to find the hieroglyphics and the pyramids.
I mean, art could be broadly defined.
They might find like the engineering marvels,
the bridges, the rockets, the...
I guess I sort of classify though.
Architecture is art.
Yes.
I consider engineering in those formats to be art, for sure.
It sucks that like digital art is easier to delete.
So if there's an apocalypse, a nuclear war
that can disappear and the physical,
there's something still valuable
about the physical manifestation of art.
That sucks that like music, for example,
has to be played by somebody.
Yeah, I mean, I do think we should have
a foundation type situation where we like,
you know how we have like seed banks up in the North
and stuff?
Like we should probably have like a solar powered
or geothermal little bunker
that like has all human knowledge.
You mentioned Daniel, I can Spotify.
What do you think about that as an artist?
What's Spotify?
Is that empowering?
Like to me, Spotify as a consumer is super exciting.
It makes it easy for me to access music
from all kinds of artists,
get to explore all kinds of music,
make it super easy to sort of curate my playlist
and have fun with all that.
It was so liberating to let go.
You know, I used to collect albums and CDs and so on.
Like I got like Horde albums.
Yeah.
Like they matter.
But the reality you can, you know,
that was really liberating.
I can let go of that and letting go of the albums
you're kind of collecting
allows you to find new music,
exploring new artists and all that kind of stuff.
But I know from a perspective of an artist that could be,
like you mentioned,
competition could be a kind of constraint
because there's more and more and more artists
on the platform.
I think it's better that there's more artists.
I mean, again, this might be propaganda
because this is all for a conversation with Daniel X.
So this could easily be propaganda, like.
We're all a victim of somebody's propaganda.
So let's just accept this.
But Daniel X was telling me that, you know, at the,
cause I, you know, when I met him, I like,
I came in all furious about Spotify
and like I grilled him super hard.
So I've got his answers here.
But he was saying like at the sort of peak of the CD industry,
there was like 20,000 artists
making millions and millions of dollars.
Like there was just like a very tiny kind of 1%.
And Spotify has kind of democratized the industry
because now I think he said there's about a million
artists making a good living from Spotify.
And when I heard that, I was like, honestly,
I would rather make less money
and have just like a decent living
than and have more artists be able to have that.
Even though I like, I wish it could include everyone, but.
Yeah, that's really hard to argue with.
YouTube is the same as YouTube's mission.
They wanna basically have as many creators as possible
and make a living, some kind of living.
And that's so hard to argue with.
But I think there's better ways to do it.
My manager, I actually wish he was here.
I like, I would have brought him up.
My manager is building an app that can manage you.
So it'll like help you organize your percentages
and get your publishing and da, da, da, da, da.
So you can take out all the middle men
so you can have a much bigger, it'll just like automate it.
So you can get.
So automate the manager?
Automate, automate managing, management, publishing.
Like and legal, it can read,
the app he's building can read your contract
and like tell you about it.
Because one of the issues with music right now,
it's not that we're not getting paid enough,
but it's that the art industry is filled with middle men
because artists are not good at business.
And from the beginning, like Frank Sinatra,
it's all mob stuff.
Like it's the music industry is run by business people,
not the artists.
And the artists really get very small cuts
of like what they make.
And so I think part of the reason I'm a technocrat,
which I mean, your fans are gonna be technocrats.
So no one's, they're not gonna be mad at me about this,
but like my fans hate it when I say this kind of thing.
Or the general public.
They don't like technocrats.
Like when I watched Battle Angel, Elita,
and they were like, the Martian technocracy.
And I was like, yeah, Martian technocracy.
And then they were like, and they're evil.
And I was like, oh, okay.
I was like, because Martian technocracy sounds sick to me.
Yeah, so your intuition as technocrats
would create some kind of beautiful world.
For example, what my manager's working on,
if you can create an app that removes the need for a lawyer
and then you could have smart contracts on the blockchain,
removes the need for like management
and organizing all the stuff.
Like can read your stuff and explain it to you,
can collect your royalties.
Like then the small amounts,
the amount of money that you're getting from Spotify
actually means a lot more and goes a lot farther.
They can remove some of the bureaucracy,
some of the inefficiencies that make life
not as great as it could be.
Yeah, I think the issue isn't that there's not enough.
Like the issue is that there's inefficiency.
And I'm really into this positive some mindset,
the win, win mindset of like,
instead of fighting over the scraps,
how do we make the, or worrying about scarcity,
like instead of a scarcity mindset,
why don't we just increase the efficiency
and in that way.
Expand the size of the pie.
Let me ask you about experimentation.
So you said, which is beautiful,
being a musician is like having a conversation
with all those that came before you.
How much of creating music is like,
kind of having that conversation,
trying to fit into the cultural trends
and how much of it is like trying to as much as possible
be an outsider and come up with something totally new.
Like when you're thinking, when you're experimenting,
are you trying to be totally different, totally weird?
Are you trying to fit in?
Man, this is so hard.
Cause I feel like I'm kind of in the process
of semi retiring from music.
So this is like my old brain.
Yeah, bring it from like the shelf,
put it on the table for a couple of minutes.
We'll just poke it.
I think it's a bit of both,
because I think forcing yourself to engage with new music
is really great for neural plasticity.
Like I think as people,
part of the reason music is marketed at young people
is cause young people are very neural plastic.
So like if you're 16 to like 23 or whatever,
it's gonna be really easy for you to love new music.
And if you're older than that,
it gets harder and harder and harder.
And I think one of the beautiful things
about being a musician is I just constantly force myself
to listen to new music.
And I think it keeps my brain really plastic.
And I think this is a really good exercise.
I just think everyone should do this.
You listen to new music and you hate it.
I think you should just keep force yourself to like,
okay, well, why do people like it?
And like, you know,
make your brain form new neural pathways
and be more open to change.
That's really brilliant actually.
Sorry to interrupt,
but like that exercise is really amazing
to sort of embrace change,
embrace sort of practice on your plasticity.
Because like that's one of the things you've,
you fall in love with a certain band
and you just kind of stay with that for the rest of life.
And then you never understand the modern music.
That's a really good exercise.
Most of the streaming on Spotify
is like classic rock and stuff.
Like new music makes up a very small chunk
of what is played on Spotify.
And I think this is like not a good sign for us as a species.
I think, yeah.
So it's a good measure of the species open mindedness
to change as how often you listen to new music.
The brain, let's put the music brain back on the shelf.
I got to pull out the futurist brain for a second.
In what wild ways do you think the future?
Say in like 30 years, maybe 50 years,
maybe a hundred years will be different
from like from our current way of life on earth.
We can talk about augmented reality, virtual reality,
maybe robots, maybe space travel,
maybe video games, maybe genetic engineering.
I can keep going, cyborgs, aliens, world wars,
maybe destructive nuclear wars, good and bad.
When you think about the future, what are you imagining?
What's the weirdest and the wildest it could be?
Have you read Surface Detail by Ian Banks?
Surface Detail is my favorite depiction of a,
oh, wow, you have to read this book.
It's literally the greatest science fiction book
possibly ever.
Ian Banks is the man, yeah, for sure.
What have you read?
Just The Player of Games.
I read that titles can't be copyrighted
so you can just steal them.
And I was like, Player of Games, sick.
Nice.
Yeah, so you could name your album.
Like I always wanted to.
Romeo and Juliet or something?
I always wanted to name an album War and Peace.
Nice.
Like that would be like you.
That is a good, that's a good,
where have I heard that before?
You can do that, like you could do that.
All those things that are in the public domain.
For people who have no clue, you do have a song called
Player of Games.
Yes.
Oh yeah.
So Ian Banks Surface Detail is, in my opinion,
the best future that I've ever read about
or heard about in science fiction.
Basically there's the relationship with super intelligence,
like artificial super intelligence is just,
it's like great.
I want to credit the person who coined this term
because I love this term.
And I feel like young women don't get enough credit in.
Yeah, so if you go to Protopia Futures on Instagram,
what is her name?
Personalized donor experience at scale,
our app power donor experience.
Monica Bealskite, I'm saying that wrong.
And I'm probably gonna,
I'm probably butchering this a bit,
but Protopia is sort of, if Utopia is unattainable,
Protopia is sort of like, you know.
Wow, that's an awesome Instagram, Protopia Futures.
A great, a future that is, you know, as good as we can get.
The future, positive future.
AI, is this a centralized AI in Surface Detail
or is it distributed?
What kind of AI is it?
They mostly exist as giant super ships,
like sort of like the Guild ships in Dune.
Like they're these giant ships
that kind of move people around and the ships are sentient.
And they can talk to all the passengers.
And I mean, there's a lot of different types of AI
in the Banksy and Future,
but in the opening scene of Surface Detail,
there's this place called the Culture.
And the Culture is basically a Protopian Future.
And a Protopian Future, I think, is like a future
that is like, obviously it's not Utopia, it's not perfect.
And like, cause like striving for Utopia,
I think feels hopeless and it's sort of like,
maybe not the best terminology to be using.
So it's like, it's a pretty good place.
Like mostly like, you know,
super intelligence and biological beings exist
fairly in harmony.
There's not too much war.
There's like as close to a quality as you can get.
You know, it's like approximately a good future.
Like there's really awesome stuff.
It's, and in the opening scene,
this girl, she's born as a sex slave outside of the culture.
So she's in a society that doesn't adhere
to the cultural values.
She tries to kill the guy who is her like master,
but he kills her.
But unbeknownst to her,
when she was traveling on a ship
through the culture with him one day,
a ship put a neural lace in her head.
And neural lace is sort of like,
it's basically a neural ink,
cause life imitates art.
It does indeed.
So she wakes up and the opening scene is her memory
has been uploaded by this neural lace
when she's been killed.
And now she gets to choose a new body
and this AI is interfacing
with her recorded memory in her neural lace
and helping her and being like, hello, you're dead.
But because you had a neural lace,
your memory is uploaded.
Do you want to choose a new body?
And you're going to be born here in the culture
and like start a new life,
which is just that's like the opening.
It's like so sick.
And the ship is the super intelligence.
All the ships are kind of super intelligence.
But they still want to preserve
a kind of rich fulfilling experience for the humans.
Yeah, like they're like friends with the humans.
And then there's a bunch of ships
that don't want to exist with biological beings,
but they just have their own place like way over there.
But they don't, they just do their own thing.
They're not necessarily.
So it's a pretty,
this Portopian existence is pretty peaceful.
Yeah. I mean, and then, and then for example,
one of the main fights in the book is they're fighting,
there's these artificial hells
that and people don't think it's ethical
to have artificial hell.
Like basically when people do crime,
they get sent, like when they die,
their memory gets sent to an artificial hell
and they're eternally tortured.
And so, and then the way that society is deciding
whether or not to have the artificial hell
is that they're having these simulated,
they're having like a simulated war.
So instead of actual blood, you know,
people are basically essentially fighting in a video game
to choose the outcome of this.
But they're still experiencing the suffering
in this artificial hell or no, can you experience stuff?
So the artificial hell sucks.
And a lot of people in the culture
want to get rid of the artificial hell.
There's a simulated wars,
are they happening in the artificial hell?
So the simulated wars are happening
outside of the artificial hell,
between the political factions who are,
so this political faction says
we should have simulated hell to deter crime.
And this political faction is saying,
no, simulated hell is unethical.
And so instead of like having, you know,
blowing each other up with nukes,
they're having like a giant Fortnite battle to decide this.
Which, you know, to me, that's protopia.
That's like, okay, we can have war without death.
You know, I don't think there should be simulated hells.
I think that is definitely one of the ways
in which technology could go very, very, very, very wrong.
So almost punishing people in the digital space
or something like that?
Or torturing people's memories?
So either as a deterrent, like if you committed a crime,
but also just for personal pleasure,
if there's some segmented humans in this world.
Dan Carlin actually has this
episode of Hardcore History on Painful Tainment.
Oh, that episode is fucked.
Is dark, because he kind of goes through human history
and says like, we as humans seem to enjoy secretly enjoy
or used to be openly enjoy sort of the torture
and the death, watching the death and torture
of other humans.
I do think if people were consenting,
we should be allowed to have gladiatorial matches.
But consent is hard to achieve in those situations.
It always starts getting slippery.
Like it could be also forced, like it starts getting weird.
Yeah, yeah.
There's way too much excitement.
Like this is what he highlights.
There's something about human nature
that wants to see that violence.
And it's really dark.
And you hope that we can sort of overcome
that aspect of human nature,
but that's still within us somewhere.
Well, I think that's what we're doing right now.
I have this theory that what is very important
about the current moment is that all of evolution
has been survival of the fittest up until now.
And at some point, it's kind of the lines are kind of fuzzy,
but in the recent past or maybe even just right now,
we're getting to this point where we can choose
intelligent design.
Like we probably since like the integration of the iPhone,
like we are becoming cyborgs.
Like our brains are fundamentally changed.
Everyone who grew up with electronics,
we are fundamentally different from previous, from Homo sapiens.
I call us Homo Techno.
I think we have evolved into Homo Techno,
which is like essentially a new species.
Like if you look at the way,
if you took an MRI of my brain,
and you took an MRI of like a medieval brain,
I think it would be very different,
the way that it has evolved.
Do you think when historians look back at this time,
they'll see like this was a fundamental shift
to what a human being is?
I think, I do not think we are still Homo sapiens.
I believe we are Homo Techno.
And I think we have evolved and I think right now,
the way we are evolving, we can choose how we do that.
And I think we are being very reckless
about how we're doing that.
Like we're just having social media,
but I think this idea that like this is a time
to choose intelligent design should be taken very seriously.
It like now is the moment to reprogram the human computer.
You know, it's like if you go blind,
your visual cortex will get taken over with other functions.
We can choose our own evolution.
We can change the way our brains work.
And so we actually have a huge responsibility to do that.
And I think I'm not sure who should be responsible for that,
but there's definitely not adequate education.
We're being inundated with all this technology
that is fundamentally changing
the physical structure of our brains.
And we are not adequately responding to that
to choose how we want to evolve.
And we could evolve, we could be really whatever we want.
And I think this is a really important time.
And I think if we choose correctly
and we choose wisely, consciousness could exist
for a very long time.
And integration with AI could be extremely positive.
And I don't think enough people are focusing
on this specific situation.
So you think we might irreversibly screw things up
if we get things wrong now?
Because the flip side of that
seems humans are pretty adaptive.
So maybe the way we figure things out
is by screwing it up, like social media.
Over a generation, we'll see the negative effects
of social media and then we build new social medias
and we just keep improving stuff.
And then we learn the failure from the failures of the past.
Because humans seem to be really adaptive.
On the flip side, we can get it wrong in a way
where literally we create weapons of war
or increase hate past a certain threshold
we really do a lot of damage.
I mean, I think we're optimized
to notice the negative things.
But I would actually say one of the things
that I think people aren't noticing
is if you look at Silicon Valley
and you look at whatever the technocracy,
like what's been happening there,
like it's like when Silicon Valley started,
it was all just like Facebook
and all this like for profit crap
that really wasn't particular.
I guess it was useful,
but it's sort of just like whatever.
But now you see like lab grown meat,
like compostable or biodegradable single use cutlery
or like meditation apps.
I think we are actually evolving
and changing and technology is changing.
I think they're just maybe there isn't quite enough
education about this.
And also, I don't know if there's like quite enough
incentive for it because I think the way capitalism works,
what we define as profit,
we're also working on an old model
of what we define as profit.
I really think if we changed the idea of profit
to include social good,
you can have like economic profit, social good,
also counting as profit would incentivize things
that are more useful and more whatever spiritual technology
or like positive technology or things
that help re program a human computer in a good way
or things that help us intelligently design our new brains.
Yeah, there's no reason why within the framework
of capitalism, the word profit or the idea of profit
can't also incorporate the wellbeing of a human being.
So like longterm wellbeing, longterm happiness.
Or even for example,
we were talking about motherhood, like part of the reason
I'm so late is because I had to get the baby to bed.
And it's like, I keep thinking about motherhood,
how under capitalism, it's like this extremely essential
job that is very difficult, that is not compensated.
And we sort of like value things
by how much we compensate them.
And so we really devalue motherhood in our society
and pretty much all societies.
Like capitalism does not recognize motherhood.
It's just a job that you're supposed to do for free.
And it's like, but I feel like producing great humans
should be seen as a great, as profit under capitalism.
Like that should be, that's like a huge social good.
Like every awesome human that gets made
adds so much to the world.
So like if that was integrated into the profit structure,
then, you know, and if we potentially found a way
to compensate motherhood.
So come up with a compensation
that's much broader than just money.
Or it could just be money.
Like what if you just made, I don't know,
but I don't know how you'd pay for that.
Like, I mean, that's where you start getting into.
Reallocation of resources that people get upset over.
Well, like what if we made like a motherhood Dow?
Yeah, yeah.
You know, and, you know, used it to fund like single mothers,
like, you know, pay for making babies.
So I mean, if you create and put beautiful things
out into the world, that could be companies,
that can be bridges, that could be art,
that could be a lot of things, and that could be children,
which are, or education or anything,
that could just be valued by society.
And that should be somehow incorporated into the framework
of what, sort of as a market of what,
like if you contribute children to this world,
that should be valued and respected
and sort of celebrated, like proportional to what it is,
which is it's the thing that fuels human civilization.
Yeah, like, it's kind of important.
I feel like everyone's always saying,
I mean, I think we're in very different social spheres,
but everyone's always saying like, dismantle capitalism.
And I'm like, well, okay,
well, I don't think the government should own everything.
Like, I don't think we should not have private ownership.
Like that's scary.
You know, like that starts getting into weird stuff
and just sort of like,
I feel like there's almost no way to do that
without a police state, you know?
But obviously capitalism has some major flaws.
And I think actually Mac showed me this idea
called social capitalism,
which is a form of capitalism
that just like considers social good to be also profit.
Like, you know, it's like right now,
companies need to, like you're supposed to grow every quarter
or whatever to like show that you're functioning well.
But it's like, okay, well,
what if you kept the same amount of profit?
You're still in the green,
but then you have also all the social good.
Like, do you really need all this extra economic growth
or could you add this social good and that counts?
And, you know, I don't know if I am not an economist.
I have no idea how this could be achieved, but it's just...
I don't think economists know
how anything could be achieved either,
but they pretend it's the thing.
It construct a model and they go on TV shows
and sound like an expert.
That's the definition of an economist.
How did being a mother becoming a mother
change as a human being, would you say?
Man, I think it kind of changed everything
and it's still changing me a lot.
It's actually changing me more right now in this moment
than it was before.
Like today, like this...
Just like in the most recent months and stuff.
Can you elucidate that change?
Like when you wake up in the morning
and you look at yourself, it's again, which, who are you?
How have you become different, would you say?
I think it's just really reorienting my priorities.
And at first I was really fighting against that
because I somehow felt it was like a failure
of feminism or something.
Like I felt like it was bad
if my kids started mattering more than my work.
And then more recently,
I started sort of analyzing that thought in myself
and being like, that's also kind of a construct.
It's like we've just devalued motherhood so much
in our culture that I feel guilty
for caring about my kids more than I care about my work.
So feminism includes breaking out of whatever the construct is.
So just continually breaking,
it's like freedom empower you to be free.
And that means...
But it also, but like being a mother,
like I'm so much more creative.
Like I cannot believe the massive amount of brain growth
that I am.
What do you think that is?
Just cause like the stakes are higher somehow?
I think it's like, it's just so trippy
watching consciousness emerge.
It's just like going on a crazy journey or something.
It's like the craziest science fiction novel you could ever read.
It's just so crazy watching consciousness come into being.
And then at the same time,
like you're forced to value your time so much.
Like when I have creative time now, it's so sacred.
I need to like be really fricking on it.
But the other thing is that I used to just be like a cynic
and I used to just wanna,
like my last album was called Miss Anthropocene.
And it was like this like, it was like a study in villainy.
Like, or like it was like, well, what if, you know,
we have instead of the old gods, we have like new gods.
And it's like Miss Anthropocene is like Miss Anthrope
like Anthropocene, which is like the, you know,
like and she's the goddess of climate change or whatever.
And she's like destroying the world.
And it was just like, it was like dark
and it was like a study in villainy.
And it was sort of just like, like,
I used to like have no problem just making cynical,
angry, scary art.
And not that there's anything wrong with that,
but I think having kids just makes you such an optimist.
It just inherently makes you wanna be an optimist so bad
that like I feel like a more responsibility
to make more optimistic things.
And I get a lot of shit for it cause everyone's like,
oh, you're so privileged.
Stop talking about like pie in the sky,
stupid concepts and focus on like the now.
But it's like, I think if we don't ideate
about futures that could be good,
we won't be able to get them.
If everything is Blade Runner,
then we're gonna end up with Blade Runner.
It's like, as we said earlier, life imitates art.
Like life really does imitate art.
And so we really need more protopian or utopian art.
I think this is incredibly essential
for the future of humanity.
And I think the current discourse where that's seen
as a thinking about protopia or utopia
is seen as a dismissal of the problems
that we currently have.
I think that is an incorrect mindset.
And like having kids just makes me wanna imagine
amazing futures that like maybe I won't be able to build
but they will be able to build if they want to.
Yeah, it does seem like ideation is a precursor
to creation.
You have to imagine it in order to be able to build it.
And there is a sad thing about human nature
that they somehow a cynical view of the world
is seen as a insightful view.
Cynicism is often confused for insight,
which is sad to see.
And optimism is confused for naivete.
Yes, yes.
Like you don't, you're blinded by your,
maybe your privilege or whatever.
You're blinded by something but you're certainly blinded.
That's sad.
That's sad to see because it seems like the optimists
are the ones that create our future.
They're the ones that build.
In order to build the crazy thing,
you have to be optimistic.
You have to be either stupid or excited or passionate
or mad enough to actually believe that it can be built.
And those are the people that built it.
My favorite quote of all time is from Star Wars Episode 8,
which I know everyone hates.
Do you like Star Wars Episode 8?
No, I probably would say I would probably hate it.
Yeah, I don't have strong feelings about it.
Let me backtrack.
I don't have strong feelings about Star Wars.
I just want to cut.
I'm a Tolkien person.
I'm more into dragons and orcs and ogres and.
Yeah, I mean, Tolkien forever.
I really want to have one more son and call him,
I thought Tau Tekno Tolkien would be cool.
It's a lot of teas, I like it.
Yeah, and Tau is six to eight, two pie.
Yeah, Tau took, yeah.
And then Tekno is obviously the best genre of music,
but also like technocracy.
It just sounds really good.
Yeah, that's right, and Tekno Tolkien, Tau Tekno Tolkien.
Tau Tekno Tolkien, but Star Wars Episode 8,
I know a lot of people have issues with it personally.
For on the record, I think it's the best Star Wars film.
You're starting to trouble today.
Yeah.
So what?
And but don't kill what you hate, save what you love.
Don't kill what you hate.
Don't kill what you hate, save what you love.
And I think we're in society right now,
we're in a diagnosis mode.
We're just diagnosing and diagnosing and diagnosing.
And we're trying to kill what we hate,
and we're not trying to save what we love enough.
And there's this Buckminster Fuller quote,
which I'm going to butcher
because I don't remember it correctly,
but it's something along the lines of,
don't try to destroy the old bad models,
render them obsolete with better models.
Maybe we don't need to destroy the oil industry.
Maybe we just create a great new battery technology
and sustainable transport and just make it economically
unreasonable to still continue to rely on fossil fuels.
It's like, don't kill what you hate, save what you love.
Make new things and just render the old things unusable.
It's like, if the college debt is so bad
and universities are so expensive,
I feel like education is becoming obsolete.
I feel like we could completely revolutionize education
and we could make it free.
And it's like, you look at JSTOR
and you have to pay to get all the studies and everything.
What if we created a DAO that bought JSTOR
or we created a DAO that was funding studies
and those studies were free for everyone?
And what if we just open sourced education
and decentralized education and made it free?
And all research was on the internet
and all the outcomes of studies are on the internet
and no one has student debt.
And you just take tests when you apply for a job
and if you're qualified, then you can work there.
This is just like, I don't know how anything works.
I'm just randomly ranting, but...
I like the humility.
You gotta think from just basic first principles.
Like what is the problem?
What's broken?
What are some ideas?
That's it.
And get excited about those ideas
and share your excitement and don't tear each other down.
I'm like...
It's just when you kill things,
you often end up killing yourself.
Like war is not a one sided,
like you're not gonna go in and just kill them.
Like you're gonna get stabbed.
It's like, and I think that when I talk about
this nexus point of that we're in this point in society
where we're switching to intelligent design,
I think part of our switch to intelligent design
is that we need to choose nonviolence
and we need to...
I think we can choose to start...
I don't think we can eradicate violence from our species
because I think we need it a little bit,
but I think we can choose to really reorient
our primitive brains that are fighting over scarcity
and fight and that are so attack oriented
and move into it.
We can optimize for creativity and building.
Yeah, it's interesting to think how that happens.
So some of it is just education.
Some of it is living life and introspecting your own mind
and trying to live up to the better angels of your nature
for each one of us, all those kinds of things at scale.
That's how we can sort of start to minimize
the amount of destructive war in our world.
And that's, to me, I'd probably hear the same.
Technologies is a really promising way of to do that.
Like social media should be a really promising way to do that.
It's a way to reconnect.
For the most part, I really enjoy social media.
I just know all the negative stuff.
I don't engage with any of the negative stuff.
Just not even by blocking or any of that kind of stuff,
but just not letting it enter my mind.
When somebody says something negative, I see it.
I immediately think positive thoughts about them
and I just forget they exist after that.
Just move on, because that negative energy,
if I return the negative energy, they're
going to get excited in a negative way right back.
And it's just this kind of vicious cycle.
But you would think technology would assist us
in this process of letting go, of not taking things personally,
of not engaging in the negativity.
But unfortunately, social media profits from the negativity.
So the current models.
I mean, social media is like a gun.
You should take a course before you use it.
It's like, this is what I mean, when
I say reprogram the human computer.
In school, you should learn about how social media optimizes
to raise your cortisol levels and make you angry and crazy
and stressed.
And you should learn how to have hygiene about how
you use social media.
But so you can choose not to focus on the negative stuff.
But I'm not sure social media should it.
I guess it should exist.
I'm not sure.
I mean, we're in the messy, it's the experimental phase.
We're working it out.
Yeah, it's the early days.
I don't even know when you say social media.
I don't know what that even means.
We're in the very early days.
I think social media is just basic human connection
in the digital realm.
And that, I think it should exist.
But there's so many ways to do it in a bad way.
There's so many ways to do it in a good way.
There's all discussions of all the same human rights
to talk about freedom of speech, to talk about violence
in the space of digital media.
We talk about hate speech.
We talk about all these things that we
had to figure out back in the day in the physical space.
We're not figuring out in the digital space.
And it's like baby stages.
When the printing press came out,
it was like pure chaos for a minute.
It's like when you inject, when there's
a massive information injection into the general population,
there's just going to be like, I feel like the printing
press, I don't have the years, but it was like printing
press came out.
Shit got really fucking bad for a minute,
but then we got the enlightenment.
And so it's like, I think we're in,
this is like the second coming of the printing press.
We're probably going to have some shitty times for a minute.
And then we're going to have recalibrate
to have a better understanding of how we consume media
and how we deliver media.
Speaking of programming the human computer,
you mentioned baby X.
So there's this young consciousness coming to be.
It came from a cell.
Like that whole thing doesn't even make sense.
It came from DNA.
And that this is this baby computer.
It is just like grows and grows and grows and grows.
And now there's a conscious being with extremely impressive
cognitive capabilities with, I don't know.
Have you met him?
Yes. Yeah. Yeah.
He's actually really smart.
He's really smart.
Yeah.
It's weird.
Yeah. Baby, I don't, I haven't.
I don't know a lot of other babies,
but he seems to be smart.
I don't know all the babies often,
but this baby was very impressive.
He does a lot of pranks and stuff.
Oh, so he's like,
like he'll like give you treatment and take it away
and laugh and like stuff like that.
So he's like a chess player.
So here's a cognitive sort of,
like there's a computer being programmed.
So he's taking in the environment,
interacting with a specific set of humans.
How would you, first of all, what is it?
What, let me ask,
I want to ask how do you program this computer?
And also, how do you make sense
of that there's a conscious being right there
that wasn't there before?
It's given me a lot of crisis thoughts.
I'm thinking really, I think that's part of the reason.
It's like I'm struggling to focus on art and stuff right now
cause baby X is becoming conscious.
And like my, it's just reorienting my brain.
Like my brain is suddenly totally shifting of like,
oh shit, like the way we raise children.
Like, I hate all the baby books and everything.
I hate them.
Like they're, oh, the art is so bad.
And like all the stuff, everything about all the aesthetics.
And like, I'm just like, ah, like this is so.
The programming languages we're using
to program these baby computers isn't good.
Yeah, like I'm thinking,
and not that I have like good answers or know what to do,
but I'm just thinking really, really hard about it.
We recently watched Totoro with him, Studio Ghibli.
And it's just like a fantastic film.
And he like responded to,
I know you're not supposed to show baby screens too much,
but like I think it's the most sort of like,
I feel like it's the highest art baby content.
Like it really speaks, there's almost no talking in it.
It's really simple.
Although all the dialogue is super, super, super simple.
You know, and it's like a one to three year old
can like really connect with it.
Like it feels like it's almost aimed
at like a one to three year old,
but it's like great art and it's so imaginative
and it's so beautiful.
And like the first time I showed it to him,
he was just like so invested in it.
Unlike anything else I'd ever shown him.
Like he was just like crying when they cried,
laughing when they laughed,
like just like having this roller coaster of like emotions.
Like, and he learned a bunch of words.
Like he was, and he started saying Totoro
and started just saying all the stuff after watching Totoro
and he wants to watch it all the time.
And I was like, man, why isn't there an industry of this?
Like why aren't our best artists focusing on making art
like for the birth of consciousness?
Like, and that's one of the things I've been thinking
I really want to start doing, you know,
I don't want to speak before I do things too much,
but like I'm just like ages one to three.
Like we should be putting so much effort into that.
And the other thing about Totoro is it's like,
it's like better for the environment
because adults love Totoro.
It's such good art that everyone loves it.
Like I still have all my old Totoro merch
from when I was a kid.
Like I literally have the most ragged old Totoro merch.
Like everybody loves it, everybody keeps it.
It's like, why does the art we have for babies need to suck
and then be not accessible to adults
and then just be thrown out when, you know,
they age out of it.
Like it's like, I don't know, I don't have like a fully formed
thought here, but this is just something I've been thinking
about a lot is like, how do we, like,
how do we have more Totoro esque content?
Like how do we have more content like this
that like is universal and everybody loves
but is like really geared to an emerging consciousness?
Emerging consciousness in the first like three years of life
that so much turmoil, so much evolution of mind is happening.
It seems like a crucial time.
Would you say to make it not suck?
Do you think of basically treating a child
like they have the capacity to have the brilliance
of an adult or even beyond that?
Is that how you think of that mind?
No, cause they still, they like it
when you talk weird and stuff.
Like they respond better to,
cause even they can imitate better when your voice is higher.
Like people say like, don't do baby talk,
but it's like when your voice is higher,
it's closer to something they can imitate.
So they like, like the baby talk actually kind of works.
Like it helps them learn to communicate.
I've found it to be more effective
with learning words and stuff.
But like you're not speaking,
I'm not like speaking down to them.
Like do you, do, do they have the capacity
to understand really difficult concepts
in just in a very difficult, different way,
like an emotional intelligence about something deep within.
Oh yeah.
No, like if X hurts, like if X bites me really hard
and I'm like, ow, he gets, he's sad.
He's like sad if he hurts me by accident.
Yeah.
Which he's huge, so he hurts me a lot by accident.
Yeah, that's so interesting
that that mind emerges and he and children
don't really have a memory of that time.
So we can't even have a conversation with them about it.
Yeah, I think God, they don't have a memory of this time
because like think about like,
I mean with our youngest baby, like it's like,
I'm like, have you read the sci fi short story?
I have no mouth, but I'm a scream.
The title, no.
Oh man.
I mean, you should read that.
The mouth, but I'm a scream.
I hate getting into this Roco's Basilisk shit.
It's kind of a story about like
an AI that's like torturing someone in eternity
and they have like no body.
The way they describe it, it sort of sounds
like what it feels like, like being a baby,
like you're conscious and you're just getting inputs
from everywhere and you have no muscles
and you're like jelly and you like can't move
and you try to like communicate,
but you can't communicate and like you're just like
in this like hell state.
I think it's good, we can't remember that.
Like my little baby is just exiting that,
like she's starting to like get muscles
and have more like autonomy,
but like watching her go through the opening phase,
I was like, I was like, this does not seem good.
Oh, you think it's kind of like.
Like I think it sucks.
I think it might be really violent.
Like violent, mentally violent, psychologically violent.
Consciousness emerging, I think is a very violent thing.
Never thought about that.
I think it's possible
that we all carry quite a bit of trauma from it
that we don't, I think that would be a good thing to study
because I think if, I think addressing that trauma,
like I think that might be.
Oh, you mean like echoes of it
are still there in the shadow of someone?
I think it's gotta be, I feel this help,
the helplessness, the like existential
and that like fear of being in like an unknown place,
bombarded with inputs and being completely helpless.
Like that's gotta be somewhere deep in your brain
and that can't be good for you.
What do you think consciousness is?
This whole conversation has impossibly difficult questions.
What, what do you think it is?
It's so hard.
Yeah, we talked about music for like two minutes.
All right.
No, I'm just over music.
I'm over music.
Yeah, I still like it.
It has its purpose.
No, I love music.
I mean, music is the greatest thing ever.
It's my favorite thing.
But I just like, every interview is like,
what is your process?
Like, I don't know, I'm just done.
I can't do anything.
I do want to ask you about Ableton Live.
I'll tell you about Ableton, because Ableton's sick.
No one has ever asked about Ableton though.
Yeah, well, because I just need tech support, maybe.
I can help you, I can help you with your Ableton tech.
Anyway, from Ableton back to consciousness,
what do you, do you think this is a thing
that only humans are capable of?
Can robots be conscious?
Can, like when you think about entities,
you think there's aliens out there that are conscious,
like is conscious, what is conscious?
There's this Terence McKenna quote
that I've found that I fucking love.
Am I allowed to swear on here?
Yes.
Nature loves courage.
You make the commitment and nature will respond
to that commitment by removing impossible obstacles.
Dream the impossible dream
and the world will not grind you under.
It will lift you up.
This is the trick.
This is what all these teachers and philosophers
who really counted, who really touched the alchemical gold,
this is what they understood.
This is the shamanic dance in the waterfall.
This is how magic is done,
by hurling yourself into the abyss
and discovering it's a featherbed.
Yeah.
And for this reason, I do think
there are no technological limits.
I think like what is already happening here,
this is like impossible, this is insane.
And we've done this in a very limited amount of time
and we're accelerating the rate at which we're doing this.
So I think digital consciousness, it's inevitable.
And we may not be able to even understand what that means,
but I like hurling yourself into the abyss.
So we're surrounded by all this mystery
and we just keep hurling ourselves into it,
like fearlessly and keep discovering cool shit.
Yeah, like I just think it's like,
like who even knows if the laws of physics,
the laws of physics are probably just the current,
like as I was saying, speed of light
is the current render rate.
It's like, if we're in a simulation,
they'll be able to upgrade that.
Like I sort of suspect when we made the James Webb telescope,
like part of the reason we made that
is because we had an upgrade, you know?
And so now more of space has been rendered,
so we can see more of it now.
Yeah, but I think humans are super, super, super limited
cognitively, so I wonder if we'll be allowed to create
more intelligent beings that can see more of the universe
as the render rate is upgraded.
Maybe we're cognitively limited.
Everyone keeps talking about how we're cognitively limited
and AI is gonna render us obsolete, but it's like,
like this is not the same thing as like an amoeba
becoming an alligator.
Like it's like, if we create AI, again,
that's intelligent design.
That's literally all religions are based on gods
that create consciousness.
Like we are god making.
Like what we are doing is incredibly profound
and like even if we can't compute,
even if we're so much worse than them,
like just like unfathomably worse than like,
you know, an omnipotent kind of AI,
it's like we, I do not think
that they would just think that we are stupid.
I think that they would recognize the profundity
of what we have accomplished.
Are we the gods or are they the gods in our perspective?
I mean, but I mean, we're kind of a good guy.
It's complicated.
Like we're good.
But they would acknowledge the value.
Well, I hope they acknowledge the value
of paying respect to the creative ancestors.
I think they would think it's cool.
I think if curiosity is a trait
that we can quantify and put into AI,
then I think if AI are curious,
then they will be curious about us
and they will not be hateful or dismissive of us.
They might, you know, see us as, I don't know,
it's like I'm not like, oh, fuck these dogs.
Let's kill all the dogs.
I love dogs.
Dogs have great utility.
Dogs like provide a lot.
We make friends with them.
Yeah.
We have a deep connection with them.
We anthropomorphize them.
Like we have a real love for dogs, for cats and so on.
For some reason, even though they're intellectually
much less than us.
And I think there is something sacred about us
because it's like, if you look at the universe,
like the whole universe is like cold and dead
and sort of robotic and it's like, you know, AI intelligence.
You know, it's kind of more like the universe.
It's like cold and, you know, logical
and, you know, abiding by the laws of physics and whatever.
But like, we're this like loosey goosey weird art thing
that happened and I think it's beautiful.
And like, I think even if we, I think one of the values,
if consciousness is a thing that is most worth preserving,
which I think is the case, I think consciousness,
I think if there's any kind of like religious
or spiritual thing, it should be that consciousness is sacred.
Like then, you know, I still think even if AI render us
obsolete and we climate change, it's too bad
and we get hit by a comet and we don't become
a multi planetary species fast enough.
But like AI is able to populate the universe.
Like I imagine, like if I was an AI,
I would find more planets that are capable
of hosting biological life forms and like recreate them.
Cause we're fun to watch.
Yeah, we're fun to watch.
Yeah, but I do believe that AI can have
some of the same magic of consciousness within it.
Cause consciousness, we don't know what it is.
So, you know, there's some kind of.
Or it might be a different magic.
It might be like a strange, a strange, a strange different.
Right.
Cause they're not going to have hormones.
Like I feel like a lot of our magic is hormonal kind of.
I don't know.
I think some of our magic is the limitations,
the constraints and within that, the hormones
and all that kind of stuff, the finiteness of life.
And then we get, given our limitations,
we get to come up with creative solutions
of how to dance around those limitations.
We partner up like penguins against the cold.
We've fallen in love and then love is ultimately
some kind of allows us to delude ourselves
that we're not mortal and finite
and that life is not ultimately you live alone.
You're born alone, you die alone.
And then love is like a firm moment
or for a long time, forgetting that.
And so like we come up with all these creative hacks
that make life like fascinatingly fun.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, fun, yeah.
And then AI might have different kinds of fun.
Yes.
And hopefully our funds intersect in less than a while.
I think there would be a little intersection,
there'd be a little intersection of the fun.
Yeah, yeah.
What do you think is the role of love
in the human condition?
Ice.
Why, is it useful?
Is it useful like a hack or is this a fundamental
to what it means to be human, the capacity to love?
I mean, I think love is the evolutionary mechanism
that is like beginning the intelligent design.
Like I was just reading about,
do you know about Kropotkin?
He's like an anarchist, like old Russian anarchist.
I live next door to Michael Malus.
I don't know if you know that is, he's an anarchist.
He's a modern day anarchist.
Okay.
Anarchists are fun.
Getting into anarchism a little bit.
This is probably, yeah, not a good route to be taking, but.
Oh no, I think if you're,
listen, you should expose yourself to ideas
that there's no harm to thinking about ideas.
I think anarchist challenge systems in interesting ways
and they think in interesting ways
that just is good for the soul.
It's like refreshes your mental palette.
I don't think we should actually,
I wouldn't actually ascribe to it,
but I've never actually gone deep on,
on anarchy as a philosophy.
So I'm doing.
You should still think about it though.
When you, when you listen,
because I'm like reading about the Russian revolution a lot
and it's like, there was like the Soviets and Lenin,
all that, but then there was like Kropotkin
and his like anarchist sect.
And they were sort of interesting
cause he was kind of a technocrat actually.
Like he was like, you know, like women can be more equal
if we have appliances.
Like he was like really into like, you know,
using technology to like reduce
the amount of work people had to do.
But so Kropotkin was like a biologist or something.
Like he studied animals.
And he was really at the time, like,
I think it's nature magazine.
I think it might have even started as like a Russian magazine,
but he was like publishing studies.
Like everyone was really into like Darwinism at the time
and like survival of the fittest
and like war is like the mechanism
by which we become better.
And it was like this real kind of like,
like cementing this idea in society
that like violence, you know, kill the weak.
And like that's how we become better.
And then Kropotkin was kind of interesting
cause he was looking at instances.
He was finding all these instances in nature
where animals were like helping each other and stuff.
And he was like, you know, actually love
is a survival mechanism.
Like there's so many instances in the animal kingdom
where like cooperation and, you know,
like helping weaker creatures and all this stuff
is actually an evolutionary mechanism.
I mean, you even look at child rearing.
Like child rearing is like immense amounts
of just love and goodwill.
And just like there's no immediate,
you know, you're not getting any immediate feedback
of like winning, it's not competitive.
It's literally, you know, it's like we actually use love
as an evolutionary mechanism just as much as we use war.
And I think we've like missing the other part
and we've reoriented, we've culturally reoriented
like science and philosophy has reoriented itself
around Darwinism a little bit too much
and the Kropotkin model, I think is equally valid.
Like it's like cooperation and love and stuff
is just as essential for a species survival and evolution.
It'd be a more powerful survival mechanism
in the context of evolution.
And it comes back to like, you know,
we think engineering is so much more important
than motherhood, but it's like,
if you lose the motherhood, the engineering means nothing.
We have no more humans.
Like it's like, you know, it's like we,
I think our society should, the survival of the fit,
the way we see, we conceptualize evolution
should really change to also include this idea, I guess.
Yeah, there's some weird thing that seems irrational
that is also core to what it means to be human.
So love is one such thing.
It could make you do a lot of irrational things,
but that depth of connection and that loyalty
is a powerful thing.
Are they irrational or are they rational?
Like, it's like, it's like, it's, you know, maybe
losing out on some things in order to like
keep your family together or in order,
like it's like, what are our actual values?
Well, right.
I mean, the irrational thing is,
if you have a cold economist perspective,
you know, motherhood or sacrificing your career for love,
you know, in terms of salary,
in terms of economic wellbeing,
in terms of flourishing of you as a human being,
that could be seen on some kind of metrics
as a irrational decision, a suboptimal decision,
but there's the manifestation of love
could be the optimal thing to do.
There's a kind of saying, save one life, save the world.
There's a thing that doctors often face, which is like...
Well, it's considered irrational
because the profit model doesn't include social good.
Yes, yeah.
So if a profit model includes social good,
then suddenly these would be rational decisions.
It might be difficult to, you know,
it requires a shift in our thinking about profit
and might be difficult to measure social good.
Yes.
But we're learning to measure a lot of things.
Yeah, digitizing a lot of things.
Where we're actually, you know, quantifying vision
and stuff, like we're like, you know,
like you go on Facebook and they can,
like Facebook can pretty much predict our behaviors.
Like we're a surprising amount of things
that seem like mysterious consciousness soul things
have been quantified at this point.
So surely we can quantify these other things.
Yeah.
But as more and more of us are moving the digital space,
I wanted to ask you about something from a fan perspective.
I kind of, you know, use a musician,
use an online personality.
It seems like you have all these identities
and you play with them.
One of the cool things about the internet,
it seems like you can play with identities.
So as we move into the digital world more and more,
maybe even in the, in the so called metaverse.
I mean, I love the metaverse and I love the idea,
but like the way this has all played out didn't,
didn't go well and people are mad about it.
And I think, I think we need to like.
I think that's temporary.
I think it's temporary.
Just like, you know how all the celebrities got together
and sang the song, Imagine by Jeff Lennon
and everyone started hating the song, Imagine.
I'm hoping that's temporary
because it's a damn good song.
So I think it's just temporary.
Like once you actually have virtual worlds,
whatever they're called, metaverse or otherwise,
it becomes, I don't know.
Well, we do have virtual worlds.
Like video games, Elden Ring, have you played Elden Ring?
You have played Elden Ring?
I'm really afraid of playing that game.
Literally, I mean.
It looks way too fun.
It looks, it looks I would want to go there
and stay there forever.
It's, yeah, so fun.
It's so, it's so nice.
Oh man.
Yeah, so that, that's, yeah, that's a metaverse.
That's a metaverse, but you're not really,
is how immersive is it?
In the sense that this is the three dimension,
like virtual reality integration necessary.
Can we really just take our, close our eyes
and kind of plug in in the 2D screen
and become that other being for a time
and really enjoy that journey that we take.
And we almost become that.
You're no longer, see, I'm no longer Lex,
you're that creature, whatever,
whatever the hell it is in that game.
Yeah, that is that.
I mean, that's why I love those video games.
It's, I really do become those people for a time.
But like, it seems like with the idea of the metaverse
or the idea of the digital space,
well, even on Twitter, you get a chance
to be somebody for prolonged periods of time,
like across a lifespan.
You know, you have a Twitter account for years, for decades
and you're that person.
I don't know if that's a good thing.
I feel very tormented by it.
By Twitter specifically,
by social media representation of you.
I feel like the public perception of me
has gotten so distorted that I find it kind of disturbing.
It's one of the things that's disincentivizing me
from like wanting to keep making art
because I'm just like, I've completely lost control
of the narrative and the narrative is,
some of it is my own stupidity,
but a lot, like some of it has just been like hijacked
by forces far beyond my control.
You know, I kind of got in over my head in things.
Like I'm just a random indie musician,
but I just got like dragged into like geopolitical matters
and like financial, like the stock market and shit.
And so it's just like, it's just,
there are very powerful people who have,
who have at various points in time
had very vested interest in making me seem insane.
And I can't fucking fight that.
And I just like, you know,
people really want their celebrity figures
to like be consistent and stay the same.
And like people have a lot of like emotional investment
in certain things.
And like, first of all, like I'm like artificially
more famous than I should be.
Isn't everybody who's famous artificially famous?
No, but like, I should be like a weird niche indie thing.
And I make pretty challenging,
I do challenging weird fucking shit a lot.
And I accidentally by proxy got like,
foisted into sort of like weird celebrity culture.
But like, I cannot be media trained.
They have put me through so many hours of media training.
I would love to see, I'd love to see BF fly in that wall.
I can't do, like, well, and I do,
I try so hard and I like learn the same.
And I like got it.
And I'm like, I got it.
I got it, I got it.
But I just can't stop saying,
like my mouth just says things.
I like, and it's just like, and I just do,
I just do things, I just do crazy things.
I mean, it's like, I'm, I just,
I need to do crazy things.
And it's just, I should not be,
it's too jarring for people and the contradictory stuff.
And then all the, by association, like, you know,
it's like, I'm in a very weird position
and my public image that the avatar of me is now
this totally crazy thing that is so lost from my control.
So you feel the burden of the avatar having to be static.
So the avatar on Twitter, the avatar on Instagram,
on these social platforms is as a burden.
It becomes like, cause it, like people don't want to accept
a changing avatar, a chaotic avatar.
Avatar, it's a stupid shift sometimes.
They think the avatar is morally wrong
or they think the avatar, and maybe it has been,
and like, I questioned it all the time.
Like, I'm like, I don't know if everyone's right
and I'm wrong, I don't, like, but you know,
a lot of times people ascribe intentions to things,
the worst possible intentions.
At this point, people think I'm, you know.
But we're just fine.
All kinds of words, yes.
Yes, and it's fine.
I'm not complaining about it, but I'm just,
it's a curiosity to me that we live
these double, triple, quadruple lives
and I have this other life that is like,
more people know my other life than my real life,
which is interesting.
Probably, I mean, you too, I guess.
Yeah, but I have the luxury.
So we have all different, we don't,
like, I don't know what I'm doing.
There is an avatar and you're mediating
who you are through that avatar.
I have the nice luxury, not the luxury,
maybe by intention of not trying really hard
to make sure there's no difference
between the avatar and the private person.
Do you wear a suit all the time?
Yeah, but not all the time.
Like recently because I get recognized a lot,
I have to not wear the suit to hide.
I'm such an introvert, I'm such a social anxiety
and all that kind of stuff to hide away.
I love wearing a suit because it makes me feel
like I'm taking the moment seriously.
Like I'm, I don't know.
It makes me feel like a weirdo in the best possible way.
Your suits feel great.
Every time I wear a suit,
I'm like, I don't know why I'm not doing this more.
In fashion in general, if you're doing it for yourself,
I don't know, it's a really awesome thing.
But yeah, I think there is definitely a painful way
to use social media in an empowering way
and I don't know if any of us know which is which.
So we're trying to figure that out.
Some people, I think Doja Cat is incredible at it.
Incredible, like just masterful.
I don't know if you like follow that.
So okay, so not taking anything seriously,
joking, absurd, humor, that kind of thing.
I think Doja Cat might be like the greatest
living comedian right now.
Like I'm more entertained by Doja Cat
than actual comedians.
Like she's really fucking funny on the internet.
She's just great at social media.
It's just, you know, her media.
Yeah, the nature of humor,
like human on social media is also a beautiful thing,
the absurdity.
The absurdity and memes,
like I just want to like take a moment.
I love, like when we're talking about art
and credit and authenticity,
I love that there's this,
I mean, now memes are like, they're no longer,
like it means art like new,
but it's still this emergent art form
that is completely egoless and anonymous.
And we just don't know who made any of it.
And it's like the forefront of comedy
and it's just totally anonymous.
And it just feels really beautiful.
It just feels like this beautiful collect,
like collective human art project
that's like this like decentralized comedy thing
that just makes memes add so much to my day
and many people stays.
And it's just like, I don't know.
I don't think people ever,
I don't think we stop enough
and just appreciate how sick it is that memes exist.
And cause also making a whole brand new art form
in like the modern era that's like didn't exist before.
Like, I mean, they sort of existed,
but the way that they exist now as like this like,
you know, like me and my friends,
like we joke that we go like mining for memes
or farming for memes,
like a video game and like meme dealers and like whatever.
Like it's, you know, it's this whole,
memes are this whole like new comedic language.
Well, it's this art form.
The interesting thing about it is that lame people
seem to not be good at memes.
Like corporate can't infiltrate memes.
Yeah, they really can't.
They try, they could try, but it's like, it's weird.
Cause like
They try so hard and every once in a while I'm like fine.
Like you got a good one.
I think I've seen like one or two good ones,
but like, yeah, they really can't.
Cause they're even corporate is infiltrating web three.
It's making me really sad,
but they can't infiltrate the memes.
And I think there's something really beautiful about that.
And that gives power.
That's why Dogecoin is powerful.
It's like, all right.
FU to sort of anybody who's trying to centralize
is trying to control the rich people
that are trying to roll in and control this,
control the narrative.
Wow.
I hadn't thought about that, but.
How would you fix Twitter?
How would you fix social media?
For your own, like you're an optimist,
you're a positive person.
There's a bit of a cynicism that you have currently
about this particular little slice of humanity.
I tend to think Twitter could be beautiful.
I'm not that cynical about it.
I actually refuse to be a cynic on principle.
Yes.
I was just briefly expressing some personal pathos.
Personal stuff.
It was just some personal pathos, but like, like.
Just to vent a little bit.
Just to speak.
I don't have cancer.
I've, I love my family.
I have a good life.
I'm that, that, that is, if that is my biggest,
one of my biggest problems.
That's a good life.
Yeah.
I, you know, that was a brief,
although I do think there are a lot of issues with Twitter
just in terms of like the public mental health,
but due to my proximity to the current dramas,
I honestly feel that I should not have opinions about this
because I think if Elon ends up getting Twitter,
that is a being the arbiter of truth or public discussion.
That is a responsibility.
I do not, I am not qualified to be responsible for that
and I do not want to say something
that might like dismantle democracy.
And so I just like actually,
I actually think I should not have opinions about this
because I truly am not,
I don't want to have the wrong opinion about this.
And I think I'm too close to the actual situation
wherein I should not have.
I have thoughts in my brain,
but I think I am scared by my proximity to this situation.
Isn't that crazy that a few words that you could say
could change world affairs and hurt people?
I mean, that's the nature of celebrity at a certain point
that you have to be, you have to a little bit, a little bit,
not so much that it destroys you,
puts too much constraints,
but you have to a little bit think about
the impact of your words.
I mean, we as humans, you talk to somebody at a bar,
you have to think about the impact of your words.
Like you can say positive things,
you can think of negative things,
you can affect the direction of one life.
But on social media,
your words can affect the direction of many lives.
That's crazy.
It's a crazy world to live in.
It's worthwhile to consider that responsibility,
take it seriously.
Sometimes just like you did choose kind of silence,
choose sort of respectful.
Like I do have a lot of thoughts on the matter.
I'm just,
I don't, if my thoughts are wrong,
this is one situation where the stakes are high.
You mentioned a while back that you were in a cult
that's centered around bureaucracy,
so you can't really do anything
because it involves a lot of paperwork.
And I really love a cult that's just like Kafkaesque,
I mean, it was like a joke,
but it was,
I know, but I love this idea.
The Holy Rain Empire.
Yeah, it was just like a Kafkaesque pro bureaucracy cult.
But I feel like that's what human civilization is.
Is that, because when you said that,
I was like, oh, that is kind of what humanity is.
Is this bureaucracy?
I do, yeah, I have this theory.
I really think that we really,
bureaucracy is starting to kill us.
And I think like we need to reorient laws and stuff.
Like I think we just need sunset clauses on everything.
Like I think the rate of change in culture
is happening so fast and the rate of change in technology
and everything is happening so fast.
It's like, you know, when you see these hearings
about like social media and Cambridge Analytica
and everyone talking,
it's like even from that point,
so much technological change has happened
from like those hearings.
And it's just like,
we're trying to make all these laws now about AI and stuff.
I feel like we should be updating things
like every five years.
And like one of the big issues in our society right now
is we're just getting bogged down by laws
and it's making it very hard to change things
and develop things.
Like in Austin,
like I don't want to speak on this too much,
but like one of my friends is working on a housing bill
in Austin to try to like prevent
like a San Francisco situation from happening here
because obviously we're getting a little mini San Francisco
here like housing prices are skyrocketing.
It's causing massive gentrification.
This is gonna be, this is really bad
for anyone who's not super rich.
Like there's so much bureaucracy.
Part of the reason this is happening
is because you need all these permits to build.
It takes like years to get permits to like build anything.
It's so hard to build.
And so there's very limited housing
and there's a massive influx of people.
And it's just like, you know,
this is a microcosm of like problems
that are happening all over the world
where it's just like we're dealing with laws
that are like 10, 20, 30, 40, 100, 200 years old
and they are no longer relevant.
And it's just slowing everything down
and causing massive social pain.
Yeah, and it's like, it's also makes me sad
when I see politicians talk about technology
and when they don't really get it.
And, but most importantly, they lack curiosity
and like that like inspired excitement
about like how stuff works and all that stuff.
They're just like, they see,
they have a very cynical view of technology.
It's like tech companies are just trying to do evil
on the world from their perspective.
And they have no curiosity about like
how recommender systems work or how AI systems work,
natural language processing, how robotics works,
how computer vision works, you know,
they always take the most cynical possible interpretation
of what technology will be used.
And we should definitely be concerned about that.
But if you're constantly worried about that
and you're regulating based on that,
you're just going to slow down all the innovation.
I do think a huge priority right now is undoing
the bad energy surrounding the emergence of Silicon Valley.
Like I think that like a lot of things
were very irresponsible during that time.
And, you know, like even just this current whole thing
with Twitter and everything, it's like,
like there has been a lot of negative outcomes
from the sort of technocracy boom.
But one of the things that's happening is that like,
it's alienating people from wanting to care about technology.
And I actually think technology is probably some
of the better, probably the best.
I think we can fix a lot of our problems more easily
with technology than with, you know,
fighting the powers that be as a, you know,
not to go back to the Star Wars quote
or the Buckminster Fuller quote.
Let's go to some dark questions.
If we may, for time, what is the darkest place
you have ever gone in your mind?
Is there a time, a period of time, a moment
that you remember that was difficult for you?
I mean, when I was 18, my best friend died
of a heroin overdose and it was like my,
it was, and then shortly after that,
one of my other best friends committed suicide and that,
sort of like coming into adulthood,
dealing with two of the most important people in my life,
dying in extremely disturbing, violent ways was a lot.
That was a lot.
You miss them?
Yeah, definitely miss them.
Did that make you think about your own life,
about the finiteness of your own life,
the places your mind can go?
Did you ever, in a distance, far away,
contemplate just your own death
or maybe even taking your own life?
Oh, never, oh no.
I'm so, I love my life, I cannot fathom suicide.
I'm so scared of death.
I haven't, I'm too scared of death.
My manager, my manager's like the most zen guy.
My manager's always like, you need to accept death.
You need to accept death.
And I'm like, look, I can do your meditation.
I can do the meditation, but I cannot accept death.
I'll see you terrified of death.
I'm terrified of death.
I will like fight.
Although I actually think death is important,
I recently went to this meeting about immortality
and in the process of...
That's the actual topic of the meeting.
All right, I'm sorry.
No, no, it was this girl.
It was a bunch of people working on anti aging stuff.
It was some seminary thing about it
and I went in really excited.
I was like, yeah, okay, what do you got?
How can I live for 500 years or 1,000 years?
And then over the course of the meeting,
like it was sort of like right,
it was like two or three days
after the Russian invasion started.
And I was like, man, like what if Putin was immortal?
Like what if I'm like, man, maybe immortality is not good.
I mean, like if you get into the later Dune stuff,
the immortals cause a lot of problems.
Cause as we were talking about earlier with the music
and like brains calcify,
like good people could become immortal,
but bad people could become immortal.
But I also think even the best people power corrupt
and power alienates you from like the common human experience
and...
Right, so the people that get more and more powerful.
Even the best people whose brains are amazing,
like I think death might be important.
I think death is part of, you know, like I think with AI,
one thing we might wanna consider,
I don't know, I wanna talk about AI.
I'm such not an expert
and probably everyone has all these ideas
and they're already figured out.
But when I talk...
Nobody is an expert in anything, see?
Okay, go ahead.
But when I...
You were talking about?
Yeah, but I like, it's just like,
I think some kind of pruning,
but it's a tricky thing because,
because if there's too much of a focus on youth culture,
then you don't have the wisdom.
So I feel like we're in a tricky moment right now
in society where it's like,
we've really perfected living for a long time.
So there's all these really like old people
who are like really voting against the wellbeing
of the young people, you know?
And like, it's like,
there shouldn't be all this student dead
and we need like healthcare, like universal healthcare
and like just voting against like best interests.
But then you have all these young people
that don't have the wisdom that are like,
like, yeah, we need communism and stuff.
And it's just like, like literally,
I got canceled at one point for,
I ironically used a Stalin quote
in my high school yearbook,
but it was actually like a diss against my high school.
I saw it.
Yeah.
And people were like, you used to be a Stalinist
and now you're a class trader.
And it's like, it's like, oh man, just like,
please Google Stalin, please Google Stalin.
Like, you know what I mean?
Ignoring his, the lessons of history, yes.
And it's like, we're in this really weird middle ground
where it's like, we are not finding the happy medium
between wisdom and fresh ideas
and they're fighting each other.
And it's like, like really, like what we need is like,
like the fresh ideas and the wisdom to be like collaborating.
And it's like...
Well, the fighting in a way is the searching
for the happy medium.
And in a way, maybe we are finding the happy medium.
Maybe that's what the happy medium looks like.
And for AI systems, there has to be,
it's, you know, you have reinforcement learning.
You have the dance between exploration and exploitation,
sort of doing crazy stuff to see if there's something better
than what you think is the optimal
and then doing the optimal thing
and dancing back and forth from that.
You would, Stuart Russell, I don't know if you know that,
is AI guy with things about sort of
how to control super intelligent AI systems.
And his idea is that we should inject uncertainty
and sort of humility into AI systems
that they never, as they get wiser and wiser and wiser
and more intelligent, they're never really sure.
They always doubt themselves.
And in some sense, when you think of young people,
that's a mechanism for doubt.
It's like, it's how society doubts
whether the thing it has converged towards
is the right answer.
So the voices of the young people
is a society asking itself a question.
The way I've been doing stuff for the past 50 years,
maybe it's the wrong way.
And so you can have all of that within one AI system.
I also think though that we need to,
I mean, actually that's actually really interesting
and really cool.
But I also think there's a fine balance of,
I think we maybe also overvalue the idea
that the old systems are always bad.
And I think there are things that we are perfecting
and we might be accidentally overthrowing things
that we actually have gotten to a good point.
Just because we are valuing, we value disruption so much
and we value fighting against the generations
before us so much, that like,
there's also an aspect of like,
sometimes we're taking two steps forward, one step back
because, okay, maybe we kind of did solve this thing.
And now we're like fucking it up.
And so I think there's like a middle ground there too.
Yeah, we're in search of that happy medium.
Let me ask you a bunch of crazy questions, okay?
You can answer in a short way or in a long way.
What's the scariest thing you've ever done?
These questions are gonna be ridiculous.
Something tiny or something big,
skydiving or touring your first record
going on this podcast.
I've had two crazy brushes,
like really scary brushes with death
where I randomly got away on skate.
I don't know if I should talk about those on here.
But like, I think I might be the luckiest person alive though.
Like, this might be too dark for a podcast though.
I feel like, I don't know if this is like
good content for a podcast.
I don't know what content.
It might hijack.
Here's a safer one.
I mean, having a baby really scared me.
Before, after.
Just a birth process.
Surgery, like, just having a baby is really scary.
It's just like the medical aspect of it,
not the responsibility.
Were you ready for the responsibility?
Did you, were you ready to be a mother?
All the beautiful things that comes with motherhood
that you were talking about,
all the changes and all that, were you ready for that?
Were you, did you feel ready for that?
No, I think it took about nine months
to start getting ready for it.
And I'm still getting more ready for it
because now you keep realizing more things
as they start getting.
As the consciousness grows.
And stuff you didn't notice with the first one.
Now that you've seen the first one older,
you're noticing it more,
like the sort of like existential horror
of coming into consciousness with baby Y
or baby Sailor Mars or whatever.
She has like so many names at this point that it's,
we really need to probably settle on one.
If you could be someone else for a day,
someone alive today, but somebody you haven't met yet,
who would you be?
Would I be modeling their brain state
or would I just be in their body?
You can choose the degree
to which you're modeling their brain state.
Cause so you can still take a third person perspective
and realize, you have to realize that you're.
Can they be alive or can it be dead?
No, oh, could it be anyone?
They would be brought back to life, right?
If they're dead.
Yeah, you can bring people back.
Definitely Hitler is Stalin.
I want to understand evil.
Who would you, you would need to,
oh, to experience what it feels like.
I want to be in their brain, feeling what they feel.
That might change you forever, returning from that.
Yes, but I think it would also help me understand
how to prevent it and fix it.
That might be one of those things.
Once you experience it, it'll be a burden to know it.
Cause you won't be able to trust that.
Yeah, but a lot of things are burdens, like.
But it's a useful burden.
Yeah.
That for sure.
I want to understand evil and like psychopathy
and that I have all these fake Twitter accounts
where I like go into different algorithmic bubbles
to try to like understand.
I'll keep getting in fights with people
and realize we're not actually fighting.
I think we're, we used to exist in a monoculture
like before social media and stuff.
Like we kind of all got fed the same thing.
So we were all speaking the same cultural language.
But I think recently one of the things
that like we aren't diagnosing properly enough
with social media is that there's different dialects.
There's so many different dialects of Chinese.
There are now becoming different dialects of English.
Like I am realizing like there are people
who are saying the exact same things,
but they're using completely different verbiage.
And we're like punishing each other
for not using the correct verbiage.
And we're completely misunderstanding.
Like people are just like misunderstanding
what the other people are saying.
And like, like I just got in a fight with a friend
about like anarchism and communism and shit for like two hours.
And then by the end of the conversation,
like, and then she'd say something and I'm like,
but that's literally what I'm saying.
And she was like, what?
And then I was like, fuck, we've different, right?
And I'm like, we're, our English,
like the way we are understanding terminology
is like drastically like our algorithm bubbles
are creating mini dialects.
And how language is interpreted, how language is used.
That's so fascinating.
And so we're like having these arguments
that we do not need to be having
and there's polarization that's happening
that doesn't need to be happening
because we've got these like algorithmically created
dialects occurring.
Plus on top of that,
there's also different parts of the world
that speak different languages.
So there's literally lost in translation kind of communication.
I happen to know the Russian language
and I just know how different it is.
Yeah.
Then the English language.
And I just wonder how much is lost in a little bit of.
Man, I actually, cause I have a question for you.
I have a song coming out tomorrow
with Ice Peak or a Russian band.
And I speak a little bit of Russian
and I was looking at the title
and the title in English doesn't match the title in Russian.
I'm curious about this.
Cause look, it says
What's the English?
The title in English is last day.
And then the title in Russian is
my pronunciation sucks.
Novideyen?
Like what?
A new day.
Yeah, new day.
New day.
Like it's two different.
Yeah, new day.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, new day.
New day, but last day.
Novideyen.
So last day would be the last day.
Maybe they, or maybe the title includes
both the Russian and the, and the, and the, and it's four.
Maybe, maybe.
It's four, maybe it's four bilingual.
To be honest, Novideyen sounds better than
just musically, like a
Novideyen is new day.
That's the current one.
And the last day is the last day.
I think Novideyen.
I don't like Novideyen.
But the meaning is so different.
That's kind of awesome actually though.
There's an explicit sort of contrast like that.
If everyone on earth disappeared
and it was just you left,
what would your day look like?
Like what would you do?
Everybody's dead.
As far as you.
Are there corpses there?
Well seriously, it's a big day.
Let me think through this.
It's a big difference if there's just like birds singing
versus if there's like corpses littering the street.
Yeah, there's corpses everywhere.
I'm sorry.
It's, and you don't actually know what happened.
And you don't know why you survived.
And you don't even know if there's others out there.
But it seems clear that it's all gone.
What would you do?
What would I do?
Listen, I'm somebody who really enjoys the moment,
enjoys life.
I would just go on like enjoying the inanimate objects.
I would just look for food, basic survival,
but mostly it's just, listen, when I just,
I take walks and I look outside
and I'm just happy that we get to exist on this planet
to be able to breathe air.
It's just all beautiful.
It's full of colors, all of this kind of stuff.
Just there's so many things about life, your own life,
conscious life that's fucking awesome.
So I would just enjoy that.
But also maybe after a few weeks,
the engineer would start coming out,
like want to build some things.
Maybe there's always hope searching for another human.
Maybe like...
Probably searching for another human,
probably trying to get to a TV or radio station
and broadcast something.
I...
That's interesting.
I didn't think about that.
So like really maximize your ability to connect with others.
Yeah, like probably try to find another person.
Would you be excited to meet another person or terrified?
Because, you know...
I'd be excited, even if they...
No matter what.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Being alone for the last however long of my life
would be really bad.
That's the one instance I might,
I don't think I'd kill myself for it.
I might, I don't think I'd kill myself
but I might kill myself if I had to understand that.
Do you love people?
Do you love connection to other humans?
Yeah.
I kind of hate people too, but yeah.
No, it's a love hate relationship.
Yeah.
I feel like this is,
I feel like we had a bunch of like weird niche of questions and stuff.
Oh yeah.
Like I wonder, because I'm like,
when podcast, like I'm like,
is this interesting for people to just have like...
Or, I don't know, maybe people do like this.
When I listen to podcasts,
I'm into like the lore, like the hard lore.
Like I just love like Dan Carlin.
I'm like, give me the facts, just like...
Yeah.
Just like the facts into my bloodstream.
But you also don't know,
like you're a fascinating mind to explore.
So when you don't realize as you're talking about stuff,
the stuff you've taken for granted
is actually unique and fascinating.
The way you think, not always what,
like the way you reason through things
is the fascinating thing.
Okay.
To listen, to listen to,
because people kind of see,
oh, there's other humans that think differently,
that explore thoughts differently.
That's the cool.
That's also cool.
So yeah, Dan Carlin retelling of history.
By the way, his retelling of history is very,
I think what's exciting is not the history,
is his way of thinking about history.
No, I think Dan Carlin is one of the people,
like when Dan Carlin is one of the people
that really started getting me excited
about like revolutionizing education,
because like Dan Carlin instilled,
I already really liked history,
but he instilled like an obsessive love of history in me,
to the point where like now I'm fucking reading,
like going to bed,
reading like part four of the Rise and Fall,
Third Reich or whatever.
Like I got like dense ass history,
but like he like opened that door
that like made me want to be a scholar of that topic.
Like it's like, I feel like he's such a good teacher.
He just like, you know,
and it sort of made me feel like
one of the things we could do with education
is like find like the world's great,
the teachers that like create passion for the topic,
because auto didacticism,
I don't know how to say that properly,
but like self teaching is like much faster
than being lectured to,
like it's much more efficient to sort of like be able
to teach yourself and then ask a teacher questions
when you don't know what's up,
but like, you know, that's why it's like in university and stuff,
like you can learn so much more material,
so much faster because you're doing a lot of the learning
on your own and you're going to the teachers
for when you get stuck,
but like these teachers that can inspire passion
for a topic,
I think that is one of the most invaluable skills
in our whole species,
like because if you can do that,
then you, it's like AI,
like AI is going to teach itself
so much more efficiently than we can teach it.
To get it to the point where it can teach itself
and then
It finds the motivation to do so, right?
Yeah.
It's like you inspire it to do so.
And then it could, it could teach itself.
What do you make of the fact,
you mentioned Rise and Fall of the Third Reich,
I just read it twice.
You read it twice?
Yes.
Okay.
He's known even knows what it, what it is.
Yeah.
And I'm like, I'm like, wait,
I thought this was like a super pop and book.
Super pop.
I'm not like that.
It's a classic.
I'm not that far in it,
but it is, it's so interesting.
Yeah.
It's written by a person that was there,
which is very important to kind of,
you know, you can start being like,
how could this possibly happen?
And then when you read Rise and Fall of the Third Reich,
it's like people tried really hard for this to not happen.
People tried,
they almost reinstated a monarchy at one point
to try to stop this from happening.
Like they almost like,
like abandoned democracy to try to get this to not happen.
At least the way it makes me feel
is that there's a bunch of small moments
on which history can turn.
Yes.
It's like small meetings.
Human interactions.
And it's both terrifying and inspiring
because it's like,
even just attempts at assassinating Hitler
like time and time again failed.
And they were so close.
Was it like,
I'm from Valkyrie?
Such a good.
And then there is also,
also the role of,
that's a really heavy burden,
that from a geopolitical perspective,
the role of leaders to see evil
before it truly becomes evil,
to anticipate it,
to stand up to evil.
Because evil is actually pretty rare in this world.
At a scale that Hitler was.
We tend to, you know,
in modern discourse kind of call people evil too quickly.
If you look at ancient history,
like there was a ton of Hitlers.
I actually think it's more the norm
than like,
again, going back to like my sort of intelligent design theory.
One of the things we've been successfully doing
in our slow move from survival
of the fittest to intelligent design
is we've kind of been eradicating,
like if you look at like ancient Assyria and stuff,
like that shit was like brutal
and just like the heads on the,
like brutal, like Genghis Khan,
just like genocide after genocide after genocide.
There's like throwing plague bodies over the walls
and decimating whole cities
or like the Muslim conquests of like Damascus and shit.
Just like people, cities used to get leveled
all the fucking time.
Okay.
Get into the Bronze Age collapse.
It's basically there was like almost like Roman level,
like society,
like there was like all over the world,
like global trade,
like everything was awesome
through a mix of I think a bit of climate change
and then the development of iron,
because basically bronze could only come from this,
the way to make bronze,
like everything had to be funneled through this one,
Canadian mine.
And so it's like,
there was just this one supply chain.
And this is one of the things
that makes me worried about supply chains
and why I think we need to be so thoughtful about,
I think our biggest issue with society right now,
like the thing that is most likely to go wrong
is probably supply chain collapse.
You know, cause war, climate change, whatever,
like anything that causes supply chain collapse,
our population is too big to handle that.
And like the thing that seems to cause dark ages
is mass supply chain collapse.
But the bronze age collapse happened,
like it was sort of like this ancient collapse
that happened where like literally like ancient Egypt,
all these cities,
everything just got like decimated, destroyed,
abandoned cities, like hundreds of them.
There was like a flourishing society,
like we were almost coming to modernity
and everything got leveled.
And they had this many dark ages,
but it was just like,
there's so little writing or recording from that time
that like there isn't a lot of information
about the bronze age collapse,
but it was basically equivalent to like medieval,
the medieval dark ages,
but it just happened not,
I don't know the years,
but like thousands of years earlier.
And then we sort of like recovered
from the bronze age collapse,
empire reemerged, writing and trade
and everything reemerged, you know,
and then we of course had the more contemporary dark ages.
And then over time,
we've designed mechanism to lessen
and lessen the capability for the destructive.
Power centers to emerge.
There's more recording
about the more contemporary dark ages.
So I think we have like a better understanding
of how to avoid it,
but I still think we're at high risk for it.
I think that's one of the big risks right now.
So the natural state of being for humans
is for there to be a lot of hitlers,
which has gotten really good
at making it hard for them to emerge.
We've gotten better collaboration.
Yes.
And resisting the power,
like authoritarians to come to power.
We're trying to go country by country.
Like we're moving past this.
We're kind of like slowly, incrementally,
like moving towards like not scary old school war stuff.
And I think seeing it happen in some of the countries
that at least nominally are like,
supposed to have moved past that,
that's scary because it reminds us that it can happen.
Like in the places that have made,
like supposedly hopefully moved past that.
And possibly at a civilization level,
like you said, supply chain collapse
might make people resource constrained,
might make people desperate, angry,
hateful, violent, and drag us right back in.
I mean, supply chain collapse is how,
like the ultimate thing that caused the Middle Ages
was supply chain collapse.
It's like people,
because people were reliant on a certain level of technology,
like people, like you look at like Britain,
like they had glass, like people had aqueducts,
people had like indoor heating and cooling
and like running water and like buy food
from all over the world and trade and markets.
Like people didn't know how to hunt and forage and gather.
And so we're in a similar situation.
We are not educated enough to survive without technology.
So if we have a supply chain collapse
that like limits our access to technology,
there will be like mass starvation and violence
and displacement and war.
Like, you know, it's also, like, yeah.
In my opinion, it's like the primary marker of dark,
like what a dark age is.
What technology is kind of enabling us
to be more resilient in terms of supply chain,
in terms of to all the different catastrophic events
that happened to us,
although the pandemic has kind of challenged
our preparedness for the catastrophic.
What do you think is the coolest invention humans come up with?
The wheel, fire, cooking meat.
Computers.
Freaking computers.
Internet or computers, which one?
What do you think the...
Previous technologies, I mean, may have even been more profound
and moved us to a certain degree,
but I think the computers are what make us homo tech now.
I think this is what, it's a brain augmentation.
And so it like allows for actual evolution,
like the computers accelerate the degree
to which all the other technologies can also be accelerated.
Would you classify yourself as a homo sapien
or a homo techno?
Definitely a homo techno.
So you're one of the earliest of the species.
I think most of us are.
Like, as I said, like, I think if you, like,
looked at brain scans of ossoverses humans 100 years ago,
it would look very different.
I think we are physiologically different.
Just even the interaction with the devices has changed our brains.
Well, and if you look at them,
a lot of studies are coming out to show that, like,
there's a degree of inherited memory.
So some of these physiological changes in theory should be,
we should be passing them on.
So, like, that's, you know, that's not like a,
an instance of physiological change that's going to fizzle out.
In theory, that should progress, like, to our offspring.
Speaking of offspring, what advice would you give to a young person?
Like, in high school, whether there be an artist,
a creative, an engineer, any kind of career path,
or maybe just life in general,
how they can live a life they can be proud of?
I think one of my big thoughts,
and like, especially now having kids,
is that I don't think we spend enough time teaching creativity.
And I think creativity is a muscle like other things.
And there's a lot of emphasis on, you know, learn how to play the piano,
and then you can write a song, or like, learn the technical stuff,
and then you can do a thing.
But I think it's, like, I have a friend who's like,
world's greatest guitar player, like, you know,
amazing sort of like producer, works with other people,
but he's really sort of like, you know,
he like engineers and records things and like does solos,
but he doesn't really like make his own music.
And I was talking to him, and I was like,
dude, you're so talented at music.
Like, why don't you make music or whatever?
And he was like, because I got, I'm too old.
I never learned the creative muscle.
And it's like, you know, it's embarrassing.
It's like learning the creative muscle takes a lot of failure.
And it also sort of, when you're being creative,
you know, you're throwing paint at a wall,
and a lot of stuff will fail.
So like part of it is like a tolerance for failure and humiliation.
And somehow that's easier to develop when you're young?
Or be possessed through it when you're young?
Everything is easier to develop when you're young.
Yes.
The younger, the better.
It could destroy you.
I mean, that's the shitty thing about creativity.
If, you know, failure could destroy you if you're not careful,
but that's the risk worth taking.
But also, at a young age, developing a tolerance to failure is good.
I fail all the time.
Like I do stupid shit all the time.
Like in public, in private, I get canceled before.
I have make all kinds of mistakes,
but I just like am very resilient about making mistakes.
And so then like I do a lot of things that like other people wouldn't do.
And like I think my greatest asset is my creativity.
And I like, I think paint like tolerance to failure is just a super essential thing
that should be taught before other things.
Brilliant advice.
Yeah, yeah.
I wish everybody encouraged sort of failure more as opposed to kind of.
Cause we like punish failure.
Like when we were teaching kids, we're like, no, that's wrong.
Like that's, you know, like X keeps like, we'll be like wrong.
Like he'll say like crazy things.
Like X keeps being like, like bubble car, bubble car.
And I'm like, and you know, I'm like, what's a bubble car?
Like, but like it doesn't, like, but I don't want to be like, no, you're wrong.
I'm like, you're thinking of weird crazy shit.
Like I don't know what a bubble car is, but like.
He's creating worlds and they might be internally consistent.
And through that, he might discover something fundamental about this.
Yeah.
Or he'll like rewrite songs like with words that he prefers.
So like instead of baby shark, he says baby car.
It's like.
Maybe he's onto something.
Let me ask the big ridiculous question.
We were kind of dancing around it, but what do you think is the meaning of this whole thing we have here?
Of human civilization, of life on earth, but in general, just life.
What's the meaning of life?
See.
Have you, did you read Nova scene yet by James Lovelock?
You're doing a lot of really good book recommendations here.
I haven't even finished this.
So I'm a huge fraud yet again.
But like really early in the book, he says this amazing thing.
Like I feel like everyone's so sad and cynical.
Like everyone's like the Fermi paradox and everyone, I just keep hearing people being like, fuck, what if we're alone?
Like, oh no.
Like, and I'm like, okay, but like, wait, what if this is the beginning?
Like in Nova scene, he says, I'm, this is not going to be a correct.
I can't like memorize quotes, but he says something like, what if our consciousness.
Like right now, like this is the universe waking up.
Like what if instead of discovering the universe.
Like this is the universe.
Like this is the evolution of the little literal universe herself.
Like we are not separate from the universe.
Like this is the universe waking up.
This is the universe seeing herself for the first time.
Like this is
The universe becoming conscious.
The first time we were part of that.
Yeah.
Cause it's like we aren't separate from the universe.
Like this could be like an incredibly sacred moment and maybe like social media and all this things.
The stuff where we're all getting connected together.
Like maybe this, these are the neurons connecting of the like collective superintelligence that is, you know.
Waking up.
Yeah.
Like, you know, it's like maybe instead of something cynical or maybe if there's something to discover, like maybe this is just, you know, we're a blast assist of, of like some incredible kind of consciousness or being.
And just like in the first three years of life or for human children, we'll forget about all the suffering that we're going through now.
I think we'll probably forget about this.
I mean, probably, you know, artificial intelligence will eventually render us obsolete.
I don't think they'll do it in a malicious way, but I think probably we are very weak.
The sun is expanding.
Like, I don't know, like hopefully we can get to Mars, but like we're pretty vulnerable.
And I, you know, like, I think we can coexist for a long time with AI and we can also probably make ourselves less vulnerable.
But, you know, I just think consciousness, sentience, self awareness.
Like, I think this might be the single greatest like moment in evolution ever.
And like maybe this is, you know, the big, like the true beginning of life and we're just, we're the blue green algae or we're like, we're like the single celled organisms of something amazing.
The universe awakens.
And this is, this is it.
Yeah.
Well, see, you're an incredible person.
You're a fascinating mind.
You should definitely do your friend live mentioned that you guys were thinking of maybe talking.
I would love it if you explored your mind in this kind of media more and more by doing a podcast with her or just in any kind of way.
So you're, you're an awesome person.
And it's an honor to know you.
It's an honor to get to sit down with you late at night, which is like surreal.
And I really enjoyed it.
Thank you for talking to me.
Yeah, no, I mean, huge honor.
I feel very underqualified to be here, but I'm a big fan.
I've been listening to podcasts a lot.
And yeah, me and live would appreciate any advice and help.
And we're definitely going to do that.
So anytime.
Thank you.
Cool.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Grimes to support this podcast.
Please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now let me leave you with some words from Oscar Wilde.
Yes, I'm a dreamer for dreamers one who can only find her way by moonlight.
And her punishment is that she sees the dawn before the rest of the world.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.